[Music]
you know you got a hand it to engineers
what would we do without them they
invent build and fix things to make all
our lives easier but you really must
respect a guy who help light the way for
ships while being totally blind himself
here's the incredible story of Alexander
Mitchell born in 1780 in Dublin Mitchell
grew up in a wealthy family while he was
still a boy the family moved to Belfast
bright young Alexander entered the
prestigious Belfast Academy where he
excelled in science and math
unfortunately as they say there's no
fortune big enough to make a wealthy
person a healthy one and at a
mind-boggling fast rate Mitchell's
eyesight started to get worse and worse
by the time he was 16 he couldn't read
at all just six years later at the age
of 22 Alexander Mitchell was completely
blind did that put him down absolutely
not he just kept on living an ordinary
life got married and had five kids
apart from math and science he loved
music and is said to have had a
beautiful singing voice he could also
play the flute and accordion just goes
to show you that truly talented people
are usually gifted in many fields
Mitchell really enjoyed his social life
and while entertaining his guests he
acted so natural that some people didn't
even notice that he was totally blind
he played cards and backgammon with
everyone else although he did have a
special person to help him distinguish
the names of the cards or a dice throw
all his free time spent entertaining his
friends and family wasn't too far from
science though many famous names of the
time like fellow Irishman and astronomer
Thomas Robinson and English
mathematician George Boole were usually
among the guest list
anyway early on in his adult life
Mitchell set up a successful brick
making business and started building
houses around Belfast but it was around
this time when his inner inventor awoke
in order to make everything run more
smoothly and efficiently in his business
the blind man created some specific
machines
necessary for brick manufacturing and
construction when he turned 51 the
successful entrepreneur and inventor
decided it was time for a much-needed
break however his inquisitive mind
wouldn't let him retire so easily living
most of his life in Belfast a city
historically and geographically closely
connected to the sea and shipping
Mitchell had heard plenty of stories
about ships being grounded by underwater
sand banks to understand what a major
problem that was back then imagine
yourself on a nineteenth-century ship
approaching the harbour the vessel is
expensive full of goods and more
importantly carrying lots of people you
don't have any GPS or some other
satellite or radar system to show you
what lies beneath the surface of the
water or what the seabed looks like not
to mention the terrain under the water
is soft and can change with the currents
meaning a place you sailed perfectly
before could now be a lot shallower than
it once was
you're almost to the harbour when you
suddenly hear a terrifying thud you and
everyone else on board are thrown
forward as the ship comes to an
unexpected halt the vessel has scraped
the seabed and is probably damaged there
could be a hole in the hull and you
along with all the other crew members
and the precious cargo you're carrying
could find yourself sinking any minute
now
during Alexander Mitchell's time these
sorts of things could and did happen
everybody knew that sandy coasts were
dangerous for shipping for that exact
reason the shape of the seabed could
change so easily and drastically meaning
it was very possible for even an
experienced sailor to come across a
literal Sand Mountain underwater while
being 100 percent sure that there was a
perfect seabed open for safe passage
these kinds of banks can usually be
found at the mouth of a river or at a
port both were true for Belfast
even though Mitchell wasn't a sailor he
was a capable builder with a mindset on
fixing problems and the threat of these
sand banks was really disturbing for the
Irishman now normally you'd think hey
isn't this exactly what lighthouses are
for and you'd be right
lighthouses are like traffic lights for
ships that serve as a guide and warning
of dangerous areas but how can you build
a lighthouse on a soft sandy seabed
that's constantly shifting that doesn't
make for a very stable foundation and
that's where Alexander Mitchell's great
inventive mind got to work having
retired from the brick making business
the blind man found himself a new
challenge to tackle since it was
impossible to do anything about the
surface of the sea bottom or the sand
bank and a lighthouse built on the shore
wouldn't do any good in this situation
Mitchell thought of an ingenious way to
anchor the construction into the soft
malleable seabed it took him a year to
come up with a perfect solution but in
1833 he patented the screw pile
lighthouse this is what would bring the
Irishman international fame and have his
name among the greatest engineers of all
time to this day so how did his
brainchild work his solution is
surprisingly simple instead of
installing post like iron pile straight
into the soft mud or sand to make a
foundation a method that works fine when
you're building a foundation on hard
unchangeable terrain he came up with the
idea of screwing them in place sort of
like a corkscrew
thus he suggested slightly remodeling
each pile so that they'd have propeller
like blades at one end that could be
twisted into place this way of anchoring
a lighthouse was not only relatively
inexpensive but also foolproof
since the piles could be screwed at a
depth of about 21 feet it was an
outstanding invention for a guy that had
no special training in either
engineering or a lighthouse construction
and no eye sight mind you being a
responsible builder Alexander needed to
make sure that everything would work
properly so as soon as his giant
corkscrew was created Mitchell secretly
rode out to one of the sand banks in the
Belfast harbour with his 19 year old son
John
the two men installed a screw pile and
early the next morning they went back to
find it still firmly fixed in place they
did the same trial the
stay and then in a few more spots and
his screw pile held up every time but it
taken five more years of waiting until
his invention would be used in
construction for the first time Trinity
House which built lighthouses in Britain
and Ireland back then was the first to
give Mitchell screw pile ago it was used
for the maple and sands lighthouse at
the mouth of the Thames in 1838 although
he was a capable engineer the inventor
was still really worried about
everything working perfectly so the now
58 year old man personally went to the
construction site and climbed up the
unfinished building it was obviously not
a good idea to put his personal
well-being at stake but I imagine he was
thinking that if he didn't triple check
for himself that this thing was solid
he'd be putting the lives of numerous
sailors and seafarers at risk in the
future whatever his thought process was
the blind man did periodically fall into
the water and then climbed right back up
again to check whether the builders were
doing everything right
it further personally supervised a few
more constructions like this such a
remarkable attitude shows how passionate
and caring he was for his creation which
happened to be destined to stay useful
for years to come the success of his
invention allowed Alexander to return to
the construction business again and
significantly expand its borders by the
beginning of the 20th century hundreds
of screw pile lighthouses went up not
only all over the British Isles but also
in North America among them there are
for example cottage types group Isle
lighthouses of the Carolina Sounds
Chesapeake Bay Delaware Bay along the
Gulf of Mexico and along the Florida
coast not to mention countless bridges
and piers have been built around the
world using the screw pile method as
well the installation of Mitchell screw
piles was not only economically
beneficial but also eco-friendly
screwing the foundations into the seabed
means you don't need to take out a bunch
of excess soil and transport it
somewhere else
that cuts transportation costs and
reduces the environmental impact
each project has
apparently this is the reason why this
method is still widely used for a
variety of constructions be it
lighthouses railways and roads or even
telecommunications Wow
do you know about any other great
inventors with fascinating backstories
feel free to share your thoughts down in
the comments if you learned something
new today then give this video a like
and share with a friend but hey don't go
firing up your lighthouses just yet we
have over 2000 cool videos for you to
check out all you have to do is pick the
left or right video click on it and
enjoy stay on the bright side of life